---
permalink: /
title: "Language as a window to human learning and cognition"
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

I am currently an Assistant Professor of Psychology in Education at the University of Birmingham. Prior to this, I was a research fellow in the Department of Experimental Psychology at University of Oxford. My research examines the role of language experience on language and literacy development, as well as its impact on the formation of social-cultural representations, such as gender and concepts about emotions. My research approach is interdisciplinary, combining knowledge and skills of (1) psychological experiments using paradigms of word learning and sentence processing, (2) corpus linguistics using Natural Language Processing and (3) computational modelling and neural network approaches. Here are some current strands of my research.


Lexical Learning and Processing: Reading Experience & Lexical Semantic Space 
------
The core focus of my current research centres on the acquisition of new words by children through incidental encounters within meaningful contexts, such as reading experiences. Rather than learning words in isolation, children acquire them through the contextual situations in which the words appear. Reading practice not only refines fundamental skills but also fosters the development of reading fluency. However, there exists variation in reading proficiency among children, both at the word level and in terms of their reading abilities. This prompts the question of why such differences exist and how we can optimize word learning for children.
The frequency effect is consistently observed across various lexical tasks involving written words, wherein high-frequency words exhibit processing advantages. This phenomenon may shape the development of lexical quality through repetition. Higher-frequency words, encountered more frequently, tend to establish stronger memory representations over time, leading to more efficient processing compared to their lower-frequency counterparts. An alternate perspective suggests that frequency impacts lexical processing not solely through encounter frequency, but also via the quality and contextual nature of these encounters. The lexical legacy hypothesis posits that a word's knowledge base originates from its surrounding contexts, accumulated over time through reading experiences. This process results in a comprehensive database about a word, its connections to other words, and its individual lexical history. Consequently, these diverse encounters contribute to variations in word-level lexical quality, even as skilled readers engage in tasks like lexical decision within a controlled setting.
Multiple strands of evidence indicate that variability in contextual exposure influences word processing efficiency in tasks such as lexical decision. Words associated with a more diverse set of terms, indicating broader semantic meaning, are processed more effectively in lexical decision and naming tasks, surpassing the impact of word frequency alone. These variables, capturing context diversity, are termed "semantic diversity." Notably, the existing research primarily relies on adult data, highlighting the need for corresponding insights from children's reading studies, given the developmental basis of this variable.

In Hsiao & Nation (2018), I developed a measure of semantic diversity for children using the Oxford Children’s Corpus, a substantial developmental language corpus. This measure employed Latent Semantic Analysis to calculate the mean cosine distance among a word's contextual appearances, determining its semantic diversity. The study demonstrated that semantic diversity predicts children's word processing efficiency in tasks like lexical decision and naming. This effect remained significant even when accounting for frequency and document count. Contrary to adults, where semantic diversity tends to outweigh word frequency, frequency remains crucial for children due to the importance of repetition within their developing language systems. In a subsequent study (Pagan, Bird, Hsiao & Nation, 2019), we replicated the advantage of semantic diversity in natural sentence reading tasks, as revealed through eye-tracking measures. Frequency similarly exhibited a facilitating effect.
While earlier research centred on orthographic processing tasks, I further investigated the impact of semantic diversity on both lexical and semantic tasks using shared item sets for adults and children (Hsiao, Bird, Pagan, Norris & Nation, 2020). This study explored. The facilitatory effect of semantic diversity persisted in lexical decision tasks across both age groups. However, in semantic judgment tasks using a cross-modal paradigm, the effect was inhibitory. The study proposed that highly diverse words may possess less specific and more ambiguous meanings, leading to processing challenges for both children and adults.
Another avenue of exploration involved inducing semantic diversity through paragraphs with diverse or redundant topics containing target words. We found that, in young adults, redundancy initially enhanced word learning, but diversity became more beneficial after repeated exposures (Mak, Hsiao & Nation, 2021). In Taylor, Nation & Hsiao (2022), we developed a novel measure associated to the concept of diversity in the linguistic context a word can occur, termed "sentence availability". The measure reflects the difficulty of associating words with sentences. This norm, based on ratings by a large participant pool, predicted lexical decision performance using data from the British Lexicon Project.
In summary, this line of research delves into the acquisition of new words by children within meaningful contexts, emphasizing the interplay between frequency, semantic diversity, and reading fluency. The work sheds light on how diverse encounters contribute to variations in word-level processing efficiency and informs strategies for optimizing word learning experiences for children.


Differences of Children’s Language in Speech and Text
------
Adult data show that written language contain richer lexical and syntactic features compared to speech (Roland et al., 2009). There is a gap in understanding how children’s reading experience provides a type of language different from child-directed speech, which has important implications on language and literacy development. Leveraging the expansive Oxford Children’s Corpus, I conducted a comparative analysis of lexical and syntactic attributes between book language and speech. The results, highlighted in Hsiao, Dawson, Banerji & Nation (2022) and Dawson, Hsiao, Tan, Banerji & Nation (2022), underscore that child-directed books display heightened levels of vocabulary and syntax diversity and complexity compared to everyday speech. Specifically, words and sentences within books exhibit lower frequency, increased length, and greater morphological and syntactic intricacy relative to child-directed speech. This pattern holds true not only for books children read independently but also for picture books designed for parental read-aloud sessions with very young children. This research emphasizes the unique linguistic richness of books and underscores their potential to bridge achievement gaps in underprivileged environments.

Children’s Writing and Language and Social-Emotional Development?
------
The Oxford Children’s Corpus encompasses an extensive collection of writings by children aged 5-13, drawn from the BBC 500 Words competition spanning 2011-2020. This robust dataset presents valuable avenues for exploring writing and social-emotional development changes in children. In Hsiao, Banerji & Nation (2021), we examined gender bias in children’s books by adult authors spanning two centuries. The results revealed a consistent trend: male character names surpassed female names in frequency. This pattern was predominantly driven by male authors, who consistently favoured male character names. A parallel analysis of children's self-produced writing yielded comparable results, with boys writing more about male characters over various age groups. Remarkably, girls initially exhibited an egocentric focus on female characters, which gradually shifted towards a more balanced representation, incorporating more male names as they matured. This research underscores the ongoing necessity for gender-equitable education in our modern era.

Leveraging machine learning techniques, Dong, Hsiao & Nation (2023) unveiled that emotional values (valence) associated with children’s writing tend to decrease with age, particularly in boys' writing compared to girls'. This trend suggests an inclination for older children and boys to express more negative emotions through their writing. This gendered emotional pattern urges heightened consideration for boys' emotional well-being during adolescence.

Furthermore, the writing corpus provides significant insights into children’s writing development. In Hsiao, Dawson, Banerji & Nation (in review), an array of linguistic complexity measures, with lexical diversity indexes at the forefront, elucidated the primary variance in children’s writing progression. Syntactic complexity measures exhibited greater individual variability in development compared to lexical diversity, underscoring syntax as a promising intervention target to address disparities between proficient and struggling writers.


Sentence Processing and Learning: Link among Language Experience, Comprehension and Production  
------
My additional research avenue centres on the interplay between language experience, comprehension, and production. While linguistics and psychology often analyse comprehension and production separately, this overlooks essential shared elements that can enhance our understanding of both processes. Learning from prior linguistic exposure influences both comprehension and production. Importantly, production not only results from such learning but also contributes to the linguistic statistics that comprehenders acquire, forming a cyclical Production-Distribution-Comprehension loop (MacDonald, 2013). This interdependence highlights that comprehension emerges from prior linguistic exposure, while production shapes that exposure.

I utilized connectionist neural network models (Simple Recurrent Network) in Hsiao & MacDonald (2013) to examine the learning of a classical complex structure – relative clauses. The learning outcomes suggested a nuanced interaction between structural frequency and exposure to neighbouring linguistic structures, reflecting generalized learning. Human reading times closely paralleled model predictions when variables were controlled, endorsing the constraint-satisfaction experience-based account.

Hsiao, Gao & MacDonald (2014) and Hsiao & MacDonald (2016) further delved into the language statistics-production link. By manipulating animacy in Mandarin relative clauses and pro-drop sentences, I explored production preferences. The results indicated semantically-driven interference in sentence production, aligned with similar comprehension behaviors. This finding challenged syntactic-driven explanations, reinforcing the concept of "Production-Distribution-Comprehension" and the interconnected role of language statistics in shaping both comprehension and production processes. 

